Notes on the implementation of multiplot mousing
Ethan A Merritt - February 2026

History
-------

One feature that has been requested over and over, often as a bug report,
has been for the "replot" command to operate on multiplots and for mouse
coordinate readout to be provided for every panel within a multiplot.
For 20+ years the answer was that the program just doesn't work that way.

A single gnuplot "plot" or "splot" is generated using the current settings
- the axis ranges, color palette, log or linear scaling, default plot style,
etc.  These settings are then replaced by a new set that applies to the
next plot.  A "replot" command issued immediately after a single plot can
recreate that immediately preceding plot because these settings still
have the same values.  Any earlier plots were lost along with the settings
in effect when they were generated.  Alternatively, the user could change
some settings intentionally, say the axis range or palette colors,
before saying "replot".  In that case the new settings would affect the
result of re-executing the previous plot command by saying "replot".

Since each panel of a multiplot contains a separate plot, "replot" could
only regenerate the content of the final panel.  However starting with
gnuplot 6.0 the program has been gradually reworked to overcome most of
these limitations. What follows is a summary of how the implementation
of multiplots now works.  I hope it is useful for anyone who needs to
debug or modify the multiplot and mousing code in the future.

Multiplot creation and bookkeeping
----------------------------------

1) When the "set multiplot" command is executed, the program creates two
   data blocks containing gnuplot commands:
   -	$GPVAL_PRE_MULTIPLOT contains commands to reproduce the graphics
	state at the start of the multiplot.
   -	$GPVAL_LAST_MULTIPLOT records the sequence of commands issued
	to generated the multiplot, starting with "set multiplot" and
	continuing to the concluding "unset multiplot".
   The program uses each of these data blocks internally, but they are
   also available to the user.

2) At the start of each multiplot panel the screen coordinates of area
   to be used for the panel are saved to an internal array panel_bounds[i],
   where i is the panel number.  The first panel is panel 0.  This is done
   by one of three initialization routines called from multiplot_reset().

3) When the plot or splot in the panel completes, the call to
   term_end_plot() saves various properties necessary to later reproduce
   the completed plot. The axis ranges and positions are saved to
	x_mapping[i], y_mapping[i], x2_mapping[i], y2_mapping[i], ...
   The view angles and scaling are saved by save_panel_view() to
	panel_view[i]
   Other information (2D plot, 3D plot, splot map projection) are saved to
	panel_flags[i]

4) After "unset multiplot" the multiplot data structures are complete
   and the contents are not affected by subsequent gnuplot commands with
   the exception of the view angles, which may be changed by subsequent
   mousing.

At this point a "replot" command acts just as it would for a single plot.
It is equivalent to "load $GPVAL_LAST_MULTIPLOT", which is in fact
exactly what the program does internally.  Note that this does *not*
reproduce the starting state of the original multiplot.  So, just like
with a single gnuplot plot, any changes the user makes to axis ranges,
palette, default plot style, pm3d options, etc. before saying "replot"
will be evident in the re-drawn multiplot.

A "remultiplot" command, however, restores the original graphics settings
by loading $GPVAL_PRE_MULTIPLOT before it replays the multiplot commands.

Multiplot playback and mousing
------------------------------

While the multiplot is showing on the screen, mouse interaction is
handled as follows

5)  The panel currently occupied by the mouse cursor is identified by
    comparing the screen coordinates to the panel_bounds[] array

6)  The nature of panel content (2D, 3D, polar, splot, ...) is identified
    by inspection of panel_flags[]

7)  Pan/zoom and rotation via hotkeys, arrow keys, mouse wheel,
    click-and-drag, acts as it always has.  *However* rather than applying
    the requested action immediately, the program queues the action for
    execution when the multiplot is next redrawn.  In most cases the
    program then also initiates the sequence
         load $GPVAL_PRE_MULTIPLOT
         load $GPVAL_LAST_MULTIPLOT
    The first of these commands restore the original program context.
    The second recreates the original multiplot with pending changes.

8)  Execution of the replayed sequence from "load $GPVAL_LAST_MULTIPLOT"
    differs slightly from the original execution of those same commands.
    "reset", "pause" and a few other commands are simply ignored because
    execution would corrupt the data structures.

9)  At the start of each panel, the data previously saved for the axis
    mapping and view angles active in that panel are reloaded.
    The program also checks to see if there is a pending mouse operation
    (zoom/pan/rotation) queued for this panel.  If so, it is applied on
    top of the previous setting so that it has an effect on the plot
    about to be drawn.

10) When the modified plot completes, term_end_plot() again stores the
    axis mappings and view angles for this panel.  Note that these are
    post-zoom ranges and post-rotation angles, so they will persist when
    the panel is next redrawn.

11) When the entire sequence of saved multiplot commands is finished,
    control returns to waiting for command line input or further mouse
    actions.

Limitations
-----------

  - No mouse readout or pan/zoom operations are attempted for nonlinear
    axes because there is no guarantee that the "via" and "inverse" mapping
    functions are still present.  If the nonlinear mapping is set up as
    part of the command sequence for that panel then the panel will display
    correctly after "replot" even though there is no mouse readout.

  - The per-panel data structures have fixed dimension MAX_PANELS.
    This is the maximum number of multiplot panels that are responsive
    to mousing.  This limit applies only to mousing;  any additional panels
    are drawn and replotted correctly but they are not mousable.
    It would be possible to use dynamic allocation on demand but does it
    really make sense to mouse such a large number of panels?

  - There is currently no way to specify whether a user-defined hotkey
    action ("bind" command) should be executed immediately when the key
    is pressed or whether it should be queued for application to a single
    panel when the multiplot is redrawn, analogous to the way pan/zoom
    operations are handled.

  - If you modify the displayed multiplot interactively (zoom/pan/rotate)
    the state is persistent across remultiplot commands, so you can
    change terminals and replot to, e.g., a pdf file for output.
    However the data structures holding the modified axis ranges and
    view angles are not available for saving or printing, so there is
    no way to write out a script that reproduces what you see on the
    screen.
